# Moderate & Radical Non-Consequentialism

Notes from graduate seminar with Hilary Greaves and Tomi Francis on whether moderate ('half-hearted') or radical ('thoroughgoing') non-consequentialist moral theories are more plausible. The format seems to be a presentation with clarificatory questions for the first half of each class, and then substantive discussion on questions as decided by Slido votes.

I find it difficult to write emails sometimes, but I thought my permission email was good. (I basically just use this as a template for all graduate class permission emails.)

> Hi Prof. Greaves,
>
> I was wondering if I'd be able to attend your class with Dr. Francis (CC'd) on moderate vs. radical non-consequentialism?
>
> For background, I'm a math & philosophy undergraduate; I've covered some connected issues in moral philosophy and decision theory in previous undergraduate and graduate classes, respectively. (I have access to the Canvas site, and I've read through the Week 1 notes.)
>
> Thanks for your consideration!
> 
> Cheers,
> Oak

##Week 1: Introduction

Pre-reading was a set of introductory notes that Hilary had written; a lot of it is fairly familiar material, but we were promised that after this week there would be a gear shift into research-level material. I think there are plausibly non-welfare goods, and I'm not sure what the principled line is for when something becomes non-consequentialist. Talked a bit with Tomi (who I'd met before) in slightly more detail about ruling out `gimmicky' consequentialized non-consequentialist theories; a working hypothesis is that it suffices to require that axiology is sufficiently objective (in particular, not time-relative and not agent-relative). Submitted a question about whether expected-value consequentialism was really more action-guiding: I can't perfectly access what my evidence is (there are many failures of negative introspection, where I don't know that I don't actually know something), or what it says is best. We can follow objective rules like `Add salt' (without needing 'Do what, for all you know, would add salt'). It got four upvotes and went third (I considered upvoting my own question, but it wouldn't have changed how soon it went, so I didn't). I was going to include a disclaimer about how other arguments for EVC seemed better, but there wasn't enough space (and asking 'Could other arguments work better?' seemed silly, as we saw a better argument in the pre-reading). The better argument in question: the secondary norm generated by objective consequentialism doesn't actually match up with EVC, and EVC seems right where they conflict. (Suppose pill A has 1% chance to cure the patient fully, 99% chance to kill the patient painfully; pill B has 100% chance to cure the patient but give her a headache.) Sometimes the right thing to do, given what you know, is not the right thing to do all things considered.
